README.md, before:

# Dicetest

Dicetest is a framework for writing tests with randomly generated test data.

## Status of this crate

The author does not consider this crate as stable yet.

## Example

Here's an example of an incorrect sort function tested with Dicetest:

```rust
fn bubble_sort<T: Ord>(slice: &mut [T]) {
    let len = slice.len();

    for _ in 0..len {
        for j in 1..len - 1 {
            let jpp = j + 1;
            if slice[j] > slice[jpp] {
                slice.swap(j, jpp);
            }
        }
    }
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;
    use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

    #[test]
    fn result_of_bubble_sort_is_sorted() {
        Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
            let mut v = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..).roll(fate);
            hint!("unsorted: {:?}", v);

            bubble_sort(&mut v);
            hint!("  sorted: {:?}", v);

            let is_sorted = v.windows(2).all(|w| w[0] <= w[1]);
            assert!(is_sorted);
        })
    }
}    
```

Running `cargo test` produces the following output:

```text
The test failed after 31 passes.

# Config
- seed: 3713861809241954222
- start limit: 0
- end limit: 100
- passes: 1000

# Counterexample
- run code: "/yiA1sab3S4UnCf4ozyMpxMxzg1NtFybCuYLHy0/oscDAAAAAAAAAA=="
- limit: 3
- hints:
    - unsorted: [201, 209, 2]
    -   sorted: [201, 2, 209]
- error: assertion failed: is_sorted
```

You can rerun the counterexample by setting an environment variable:

```text
DICETEST_DEBUG=/yiA1sab3S4UnCf4ozyMpxMxzg1NtFybCuYLHy0/oscDAAAAAAAAAA== cargo test
```

Or you can modify the test:

```rust
Dicetest::debug("/yiA1sab3S4UnCf4ozyMpxMxzg1NtFybCuYLHy0/oscDAAAAAAAAAA==").run(|fate| {
    // ...
})
```

## Alternatives

* Write down your test data and use a loop.
* Use the [crate `quickcheck`].
* Use the [crate `proptest`].

[crate `quickcheck`]: https://crates.io/crates/quickcheck
[crate `proptest`]: https://crates.io/crates/proptest

## Guide

This section will guide you through the most important concepts and features of Dicetest.

### Pseudorandomness

The type `Seed` allows to determine the [pseudorandomness]. You can either use a fixed `Seed` or a random `Seed`:

```rust
use dicetest::prand::Seed;

println!("{:?}", Seed(42));
// Output: Seed(42)

println!("{:?}", Seed::random());
// Output: Seed(8019292413750407764)
```

The `Seed` can be used to initialize the [pseudorandom number generator] `Prng`. For each `Seed` the `Prng` provides a different infinite pseudorandom sequence of `u64`s

```rust
use dicetest::prand::{Prng, Seed};

fn print_random_values(mut prng: Prng) {
    for _ in 0..3 {
        print!("{:?}, ", prng.next_number());
    }
    println!("...");
}

print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed(42)));
// Output: 16628028624323922065, 3476588890713931039, 59688652182557721, ...
print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed(42)));
// Output: 16628028624323922065, 3476588890713931039, 59688652182557721, ...
print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed::random()));
// Output: 4221507577048064061, 15374206214556255352, 4977687432463843847, ...
print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed::random()));
// Output: 11086225885938422405, 9312304973013875005, 1036200222843160301, ...
```

[pseudorandomness]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandomness
[pseudorandom number generator]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator

### Dice

Although `Prng` can only generate pseudorandom `u64`s, the `u64`s can be used for constructing more complex values. The traits `DieOnce` and `Die` represents `Prng`-based generators for values of any type.

An implementor of `DieOnce` is a generator that can be used a single time (similar to [`FnOnce`]).
```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

let xx = "xx".to_string();
let yy = "yy".to_string();

// This generator implements `DieOnce`.
// It chooses one of the `String`s without cloning them.
let xx_or_yy_die = dice::one_of_2_once(xx, yy);
```

An implementor of `Die` is a generator that can be used infinite times (similar to [`Fn`]).
```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

let xx = "xx".to_string();
let yy = "yy".to_string();

// This generator implements `Die`.
// It chooses one of the `String`s by cloning them.
let xx_or_yy_die = dice::one_of_2(xx, yy);

// This generator uses `xx_or_yy_die` to generate three `String`s at once.
let three_xx_or_yy_die = dice::array_3(xx_or_yy_die);
```

Generators can be easily implemented and composed:
```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

// A classic die. Generates a number between 1 and 6 with uniform distribution.
let classic_die = dice::one_of_6::<u8>(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6);

// A loaded die. Generates the number 6 more frequently.
let loaded_die =
    dice::weighted_one_of_6::<u8>((1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (1, 5), (2, 6));

// Generates the result of the function.
let die_from_fn = dice::from_fn(|_| 42);

// Generates always the same `String` by cloning it.
let foo_die = dice::just("foo".to_string());

// Generates an arbitrary byte.
let byte_die = dice::u8(..);

// Generates a non-zero byte.
let non_zero_byte_die = dice::u8(1..);

// Generates a `Vec` that contains an arbitrary number of arbitrary bytes.
let bytes_die = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..);

// Generates a `Vec` that contains up to 10 arbitrary bytes.
let up_to_ten_bytes_die = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..=10);

// Generates an arbitrary wrapped byte.
struct WrappedByte(u8);
let wrapped_byte_die = dice::u8(..).map(WrappedByte);

// Generates a permutation of `(0..=n)` for an arbitrary `n`.
let permutation_die = dice::size(0..).flat_map(|n| {
    let vec = (0..=n).collect::<Vec<_>>();
    dice::shuffled_vec(vec)
});
```

The struct `Fate` is necessary for using `DieOnce` or `Die`. It contains two parameters:

* `Prng`: Provides the pseudorandom `u64`s that the implementor of `DieOnce` or `Die` can use for constructing more complex values. The implementor should only use this as its source of randomness.
* `Limit`: The upper limit for the size of dynamic data structures generated by the implementor of `DieOnce` or `Die`. The implementor is allowed to freely interpret or even ignore this value.

A `Fate` can only be constructed via `Fate::run`.

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

// Provides the randomness for the generator and will be mutated when used.
let mut prng = Prng::from_seed(0x5EED.into());
// Limits the size of dynamic data structures. The generator has only read access.
let limit = 5.into();

// Constructs a `Fate` that is only available inside the closure.
Fate::run(&mut prng, limit, |fate| {
    // Generates a `Vec` with an arbitrary length.
    let vec_die = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..);

    // Although `vec_die` can generate a `Vec` with arbitrary length,
    // the actual length is limited by `limit`.
    let vec = vec_die.roll(fate);

    println!("{:?}", vec);
    // Output: [252, 231, 153, 0]
})
```

[`FnOnce`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.FnOnce.html
[`Fn`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Fn.html

### Tests

You can write tests with the test builder `Dicetest`:
* It allows test configuration via source code or environment variables.
* It runs your test repeatedly with different seeds.
* It logs useful information that helps you to debug your test.

`Dicetest` is using the builder pattern:

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

#[test]
fn test_foo() {
    // Runs your test with default configuration.
    Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
        // Write your test here.
    });
}

#[test]
fn test_bar() {
    // Runs your test with custom configuration.
    Dicetest::repeatedly().passes(10000).run(|fate| {
        // Write your test here.
    });
}
```

The closure contains your test. With the passed `fate` you can generate test data and make assertions. If the closure panics, `Dicetest` catches the panic, logs the test result to stdout and resumes the panic.

### Hints

Hints can be used to analyze a single test run. In most cases you want to analyze the counterexample. Use it to reveal what test data were generated or which branches were taken:

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

#[test]
fn test_foo() {
    Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
        let x = dice::u8(1..=5).roll(fate);
        hint_debug!(x);

        let y = dice::u8(1..=3).roll(fate);
        if y != x {
            hint!("took branch if with y = {}", y);

            assert_eq!(3, y);
        } else {
            hint!("took branch else");
        }
    })
}
```

Running the test produces the following output:

```text
The test failed after 0 passes.

# Config
- seed: 1002476580450337062
- start limit: 0
- end limit: 100
- passes: 1000

# Counterexample
- run code: "wVL7vPmPphzT0HjGwTILuoksv/gH1iB0H5qfgApmKoIAAAAAAAAAAA=="
- limit: 0
- hints:
    - x = 5
    - took branch if with y = 2
- error: assertion failed: `(left == right)`
  left: `3`,
 right: `2`
```

### Stats

Stats can be used to analyze multiple test runs. Use it to reveal the distribution of generated test data or the probability of branches:

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

#[test]
fn test_foo() {
    Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
        let x = dice::u8(1..=5).roll(fate);
        stat_debug!(x);

        let y = dice::u8(1..=3).roll(fate);
        if y != x {
            stat!("branch", "if with y = {}", y)
        } else {
            stat!("branch", "else");
        }
    })
}
```

Running the test with the environment variable `DICETEST_STATS_ENABLED=true` produces the following output:

```text
The test withstood 1000 passes.

# Config
- seed: 9664794707732402215
- start limit: 0
- end limit: 100
- passes: 1000

# Stats
- branch:
    - 27.00% (270): if with y = 2
    - 26.50% (265): if with y = 3
    - 26.10% (261): if with y = 1
    - 20.40% (204): else
- x:
    - 28.60% (286): 1
    - 21.00% (210): 5
    - 19.70% (197): 2
    - 15.60% (156): 4
    - 15.10% (151): 3
```

### Environment variables

You can use environment variables to configure your tests without changing the source code. See the documentation of `Dicetest` for a full list of supported environment variables. Here are some useful examples:

* You want to debug the counterexample of `mytest` with its run code (copied from the test result):
```text
DICETEST_DEBUG=ABIDje/+CYVkmmCVTwKJ2go6VrzZWMjO2Bqc9m3b3h0DAAAAAAAAAA== cargo test mytest
```
* You want to reproduce the result of `mytest` with its seed (copied from the test result):
```text
DICETEST_SEED=795359663177100823 cargo test mytest
```
* You want to see the stats of `mytest`:
```text
DICETEST_STATS_ENABLED=true cargo test -- --show-output mytest
```
* You want to run `mytest` with more passes and bigger test data:
```text
DICETEST_PASSES_MULTIPLIER=10 DICETEST_LIMIT_MULTIPLIER=2 cargo test mytest
```
* You want to run `mytest` with a single test run and see the test result:
```text
DICETEST_MODE=once cargo test -- --show-output mytest
```

## License

Licensed under either of

 * Apache License, Version 2.0
   ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
 * MIT license
   ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

## Contribution

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in the work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be
dual licensed as above, without any additional terms or conditions.

Commit message:

Add features section to readme

README.md, after:

# Dicetest

Dicetest is a framework for writing tests with randomly generated test data.

## Status of this crate

The author does not consider this crate as stable yet.

## Example

Here's an example of an incorrect sort function tested with Dicetest:

```rust
fn bubble_sort<T: Ord>(slice: &mut [T]) {
    let len = slice.len();

    for _ in 0..len {
        for j in 1..len - 1 {
            let jpp = j + 1;
            if slice[j] > slice[jpp] {
                slice.swap(j, jpp);
            }
        }
    }
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;
    use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

    #[test]
    fn result_of_bubble_sort_is_sorted() {
        Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
            let mut v = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..).roll(fate);
            hint!("unsorted: {:?}", v);

            bubble_sort(&mut v);
            hint!("  sorted: {:?}", v);

            let is_sorted = v.windows(2).all(|w| w[0] <= w[1]);
            assert!(is_sorted);
        })
    }
}    
```

Running `cargo test` produces the following output:

```text
The test failed after 31 passes.

# Config
- seed: 3713861809241954222
- start limit: 0
- end limit: 100
- passes: 1000

# Counterexample
- run code: "/yiA1sab3S4UnCf4ozyMpxMxzg1NtFybCuYLHy0/oscDAAAAAAAAAA=="
- limit: 3
- hints:
    - unsorted: [201, 209, 2]
    -   sorted: [201, 2, 209]
- error: assertion failed: is_sorted
```

You can rerun the counterexample by setting an environment variable:

```text
DICETEST_DEBUG=/yiA1sab3S4UnCf4ozyMpxMxzg1NtFybCuYLHy0/oscDAAAAAAAAAA== cargo test
```

Or you can modify the test:

```rust
Dicetest::debug("/yiA1sab3S4UnCf4ozyMpxMxzg1NtFybCuYLHy0/oscDAAAAAAAAAA==").run(|fate| {
    // ...
})
```

## Features

These features are **available**:

- Generators for many stdlib types (`u8`, `String`, `Vec`, etc.).
- Generators for functions (`FnMut`, `FnOnce`, `Fn`).
- Generator combinators (`map`, `flat_map`, `zip_2`, etc.).
- Integration of `rand::distributions::Distribution`.
- Configurable test runner.
- Utilities for debugging tests (`hints` and `stats`).

These features are **missing**:

- Shrinking of counterexamples.
- Custom pseudorandom number generators.
- Type class for arbitrary types.

## Alternatives

* Write down your test data and use a loop.
* Use the [crate `quickcheck`].
* Use the [crate `proptest`].

[crate `quickcheck`]: https://crates.io/crates/quickcheck
[crate `proptest`]: https://crates.io/crates/proptest

## Guide

This section will guide you through the most important concepts and features of Dicetest.

### Pseudorandomness

The type `Seed` allows to determine the [pseudorandomness]. You can either use a fixed `Seed` or a random `Seed`:

```rust
use dicetest::prand::Seed;

println!("{:?}", Seed(42));
// Output: Seed(42)

println!("{:?}", Seed::random());
// Output: Seed(8019292413750407764)
```

The `Seed` can be used to initialize the [pseudorandom number generator] `Prng`. For each `Seed` the `Prng` provides a different infinite pseudorandom sequence of `u64`s

```rust
use dicetest::prand::{Prng, Seed};

fn print_random_values(mut prng: Prng) {
    for _ in 0..3 {
        print!("{:?}, ", prng.next_number());
    }
    println!("...");
}

print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed(42)));
// Output: 16628028624323922065, 3476588890713931039, 59688652182557721, ...
print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed(42)));
// Output: 16628028624323922065, 3476588890713931039, 59688652182557721, ...
print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed::random()));
// Output: 4221507577048064061, 15374206214556255352, 4977687432463843847, ...
print_random_values(Prng::from_seed(Seed::random()));
// Output: 11086225885938422405, 9312304973013875005, 1036200222843160301, ...
```

[pseudorandomness]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandomness
[pseudorandom number generator]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator

### Dice

Although `Prng` can only generate pseudorandom `u64`s, the `u64`s can be used for constructing more complex values. The traits `DieOnce` and `Die` represents `Prng`-based generators for values of any type.

An implementor of `DieOnce` is a generator that can be used a single time (similar to [`FnOnce`]).
```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

let xx = "xx".to_string();
let yy = "yy".to_string();

// This generator implements `DieOnce`.
// It chooses one of the `String`s without cloning them.
let xx_or_yy_die = dice::one_of_2_once(xx, yy);
```

An implementor of `Die` is a generator that can be used infinite times (similar to [`Fn`]).
```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

let xx = "xx".to_string();
let yy = "yy".to_string();

// This generator implements `Die`.
// It chooses one of the `String`s by cloning them.
let xx_or_yy_die = dice::one_of_2(xx, yy);

// This generator uses `xx_or_yy_die` to generate three `String`s at once.
let three_xx_or_yy_die = dice::array_3(xx_or_yy_die);
```

Generators can be easily implemented and composed:
```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

// A classic die. Generates a number between 1 and 6 with uniform distribution.
let classic_die = dice::one_of_6::<u8>(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6);

// A loaded die. Generates the number 6 more frequently.
let loaded_die =
    dice::weighted_one_of_6::<u8>((1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (1, 5), (2, 6));

// Generates the result of the function.
let die_from_fn = dice::from_fn(|_| 42);

// Generates always the same `String` by cloning it.
let foo_die = dice::just("foo".to_string());

// Generates an arbitrary byte.
let byte_die = dice::u8(..);

// Generates a non-zero byte.
let non_zero_byte_die = dice::u8(1..);

// Generates a `Vec` that contains an arbitrary number of arbitrary bytes.
let bytes_die = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..);

// Generates a `Vec` that contains up to 10 arbitrary bytes.
let up_to_ten_bytes_die = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..=10);

// Generates an arbitrary wrapped byte.
struct WrappedByte(u8);
let wrapped_byte_die = dice::u8(..).map(WrappedByte);

// Generates a permutation of `(0..=n)` for an arbitrary `n`.
let permutation_die = dice::size(0..).flat_map(|n| {
    let vec = (0..=n).collect::<Vec<_>>();
    dice::shuffled_vec(vec)
});
```

The struct `Fate` is necessary for using `DieOnce` or `Die`. It contains two parameters:

* `Prng`: Provides the pseudorandom `u64`s that the implementor of `DieOnce` or `Die` can use for constructing more complex values. The implementor should only use this as its source of randomness.
* `Limit`: The upper limit for the size of dynamic data structures generated by the implementor of `DieOnce` or `Die`. The implementor is allowed to freely interpret or even ignore this value.

A `Fate` can only be constructed via `Fate::run`.

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::dice::*;

// Provides the randomness for the generator and will be mutated when used.
let mut prng = Prng::from_seed(0x5EED.into());
// Limits the size of dynamic data structures. The generator has only read access.
let limit = 5.into();

// Constructs a `Fate` that is only available inside the closure.
Fate::run(&mut prng, limit, |fate| {
    // Generates a `Vec` with an arbitrary length.
    let vec_die = dice::vec(dice::u8(..), ..);

    // Although `vec_die` can generate a `Vec` with arbitrary length,
    // the actual length is limited by `limit`.
    let vec = vec_die.roll(fate);

    println!("{:?}", vec);
    // Output: [252, 231, 153, 0]
})
```

[`FnOnce`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.FnOnce.html
[`Fn`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Fn.html

### Tests

You can write tests with the test builder `Dicetest`:
* It allows test configuration via source code or environment variables.
* It runs your test repeatedly with different seeds.
* It logs useful information that helps you to debug your test.

`Dicetest` is using the builder pattern:

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

#[test]
fn test_foo() {
    // Runs your test with default configuration.
    Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
        // Write your test here.
    });
}

#[test]
fn test_bar() {
    // Runs your test with custom configuration.
    Dicetest::repeatedly().passes(10000).run(|fate| {
        // Write your test here.
    });
}
```

The closure contains your test. With the passed `fate` you can generate test data and make assertions. If the closure panics, `Dicetest` catches the panic, logs the test result to stdout and resumes the panic.

### Hints

Hints can be used to analyze a single test run. In most cases you want to analyze the counterexample. Use it to reveal what test data were generated or which branches were taken:

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

#[test]
fn test_foo() {
    Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
        let x = dice::u8(1..=5).roll(fate);
        hint_debug!(x);

        let y = dice::u8(1..=3).roll(fate);
        if y != x {
            hint!("took branch if with y = {}", y);

            assert_eq!(3, y);
        } else {
            hint!("took branch else");
        }
    })
}
```

Running the test produces the following output:

```text
The test failed after 0 passes.

# Config
- seed: 1002476580450337062
- start limit: 0
- end limit: 100
- passes: 1000

# Counterexample
- run code: "wVL7vPmPphzT0HjGwTILuoksv/gH1iB0H5qfgApmKoIAAAAAAAAAAA=="
- limit: 0
- hints:
    - x = 5
    - took branch if with y = 2
- error: assertion failed: `(left == right)`
  left: `3`,
 right: `2`
```

### Stats

Stats can be used to analyze multiple test runs. Use it to reveal the distribution of generated test data or the probability of branches:

```rust
use dicetest::prelude::tests::*;

#[test]
fn test_foo() {
    Dicetest::repeatedly().run(|fate| {
        let x = dice::u8(1..=5).roll(fate);
        stat_debug!(x);

        let y = dice::u8(1..=3).roll(fate);
        if y != x {
            stat!("branch", "if with y = {}", y)
        } else {
            stat!("branch", "else");
        }
    })
}
```

Running the test with the environment variable `DICETEST_STATS_ENABLED=true` produces the following output:

```text
The test withstood 1000 passes.

# Config
- seed: 9664794707732402215
- start limit: 0
- end limit: 100
- passes: 1000

# Stats
- branch:
    - 27.00% (270): if with y = 2
    - 26.50% (265): if with y = 3
    - 26.10% (261): if with y = 1
    - 20.40% (204): else
- x:
    - 28.60% (286): 1
    - 21.00% (210): 5
    - 19.70% (197): 2
    - 15.60% (156): 4
    - 15.10% (151): 3
```

### Environment variables

You can use environment variables to configure your tests without changing the source code. See the documentation of `Dicetest` for a full list of supported environment variables. Here are some useful examples:

* You want to debug the counterexample of `mytest` with its run code (copied from the test result):
```text
DICETEST_DEBUG=ABIDje/+CYVkmmCVTwKJ2go6VrzZWMjO2Bqc9m3b3h0DAAAAAAAAAA== cargo test mytest
```
* You want to reproduce the result of `mytest` with its seed (copied from the test result):
```text
DICETEST_SEED=795359663177100823 cargo test mytest
```
* You want to see the stats of `mytest`:
```text
DICETEST_STATS_ENABLED=true cargo test -- --show-output mytest
```
* You want to run `mytest` with more passes and bigger test data:
```text
DICETEST_PASSES_MULTIPLIER=10 DICETEST_LIMIT_MULTIPLIER=2 cargo test mytest
```
* You want to run `mytest` with a single test run and see the test result:
```text
DICETEST_MODE=once cargo test -- --show-output mytest
```

## License

Licensed under either of

 * Apache License, Version 2.0
   ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
 * MIT license
   ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

## Contribution

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in the work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be
dual licensed as above, without any additional terms or conditions.
